Mentoring System Info

1) General Overview and Original Purposes

  The mentoring system was originally designed as a hub specific feature for 
the NMDC script Zeus. However, since it can have many applications and uses 
beyond its original intent, we decided to include the mentoring feature in 
PTDC. We hope you'll like it. Here is how it works:

a) From a code perspective (all users)
  When your hub is running with mentoring enabled, the minimum share size 
rule is not enforced at login. Instead, it is enforced upon download 
attempts. In other words, with a minimum share size requirement of 5 Gb, 
someone could connect to your hub with only 1 Gb shared, chat around, play 
blackjack or trivia, send PMs, etc. But the minute they attempt to download 
a file from someone, they will be kicked, and the download command will be 
filtered (i.e. not forwarded) by the hub, effectively preventing the 
download.

b) From a code perspective (specific users)
  With mentoring enabled, users under the minimum share size can connect to 
the hub and can therefore request to be mentored. The mentoring relationship 
typically involves a mentored user, and an OP mentoring them. Should an OP 
accept to mentor a specific user (and the user be registered as such), the 
mentored user will be able to download freely from other users to build up 
their share, as if their share was over the minimum requirement.
  You can however consider a "solo" implementation, where mentored users are 
simply a class like any other, and are left to fend for themselves.

c) Original intent
  The mentoring system was designed to be "newbie friendly", and allow 
newcomers to make their first steps in the DC community with a temporarly 
limited "start share". Newcomers typically need some guidance and tips to 
help them get started with the software, and understand the intent behind 
some of the rules of your hub as well as the more general "netiquette" in 
the DC community (like staying in the hub while downloading, etc). While 
anyone can of course answer these questions and explain those aspects of DC, 
it is generally better to have a single interlocutor and a dedicated 
relationship. This is why the mentoring system is originally intended as 
2-person relationship : the mentored user, and the OP mentoring them.
  While the hub's code will cover the minimum share size aspect, it is 
important to note that it is only the emerged part of the iceberg, so to 
speak. A successful implementation of the mentoring system depends heavily 
on your OPs being ready to dedicate their time and attention to newcomers; 
the code is only a minor aspect of it.

d) Goodwill concept
  Goodwill is pretty simple to understand. Mentoring takes care of the 
minimum share size, because even with the best intentions, some people 
simply don't have enough content or storage space to bring their share over 
the minimum requirement of your hub.
  On the other hand, things like minimum slot requirement, maximum number of 
simultaneous hubs, etc. are all a matter of goodwill. Anyone can open one 
extra slot, or connect only to a reasonable number of simultaneous hubs. 
This is why the mentoring system affects only the minimum share size. Even 
if you enable mentoring on your hub, people not meeting requirements other 
than the share size will still be prevented to connect.
  As an extension of the goodwill concept imbedded in mentoring, the hub 
will prevent anyone (including mentored users) that tries to connect with 
exactly 0 bytes shared. This will however not affect OPs, if you have the 
option "OPs bypass all share and slot rules" checked.

2) Other possible uses of the mentoring system

  The mentoring system can be used as a manual substitute for a rating 
server. If you are unfamiliar with the ratings server concept, here is a 
short extract of a post from volkris on the DC++ boards :

« A ratings server will rate the value of a particular client to a group, be 
that group DC as a whole, a hub, or whatever.
(...)
Just to provide a specific example, if I had a copy of a movie that everyone 
wanted, say it hadn't come out in theaters yet but somehow I had gotten a 
high quality copy, I should be allowed to enter your movie sharing hub with 
only that single 700meg movie shared. The users of your hub, under the 
current system, would lose out because I didn't share 100G, while a ratings 
system would reveal the popularity of my offer and your hub would let me in. 
»
(check on 
http://dcplusplus.sourceforge.net/forum/viewtopic.php?t=776&start=0 for the 
complete thread this extract was taken from)

  The mentoring system doesn't automatically rate users under (or over) the 
minimum share, neither does it assign a priority to users waiting to connect 
when the hub is full. However it does let them in the hub, and you can 
manually mentor users with popular offers; which means you can use the 
mentoring system to achieve similar end results as a ratings server.
  The bad thing is of course that, unlike a ratings server, it's not 
automated... but the good thing is that, unlike a ratings server, mentoring 
exists =)

3) Flaws of the mentoring system

  The mentoring system has a minor flaw : someone who connects with a share 
size under the minimum requirement might be kicked for their client 
attempting to download files, even if the user did not actually attempt the 
download.
  This is an unfortunate consequence of the way the DC protocol works. If a 
passive user P attempts to download from an active user A, the client from A 
generates the same protocol command as if A had attempted to download a file 
from P. This is because passive downloads work "backwards".
  To avoid being kicked by mistake, users under the minimum share 
requirement should switch their client to passive mode (passive users can't 
download from other passive users, so they will never be kicked by mistake 
either).
  It is suggested that, upon login, you serve a short message to users under 
the minimum share requirement and warn them that they should switch to 
passive mode while they stay in your hub. Since they won't be able to 
download from other users no matter what, being in passive or active mode 
won't affect them. You will probably want to send them a short message upon 
login anyway, to explain the mentoring system and let them know they were 
allowed to connect, but aren't allowed to download until their share meets 
your requirements (or until they get mentored)
  Note that this flaw does not affect mentored users. Only unmentored users 
that are under the minimum share size.

4) Implementation suggestions

a) If you want your users to enjoy the mentoring system, it is important 
that they know it exists. For aesthetic and bandwidth issues, you probably 
will want to present the mentoring system on a webpage rather than in a 3 
pages long PM. Simply serve a link to some page on your hub's website 
presenting the mentoring system. If you need an example or some inspiration, 
you are welcome to re-use parts of the presentation used by Children of 
Zeus. You can find it on http://www.freewebs.com/coz/en/mentor.html

b) Mentoring is meant to be a temporary status. The suggested length is 2 
weeks, renewable if the mentored user was meeting the expectations you had 
in mind when you enabled mentoring for you hub.

c) Mentoring should be voluntary and optional for the OPs. But it should 
also be rewarding for them. If you have a page on your hub's website listing 
the OPs, why not assign them one little badge icon per user they 
successfully mentored (i.e. who still was regularly in the hub x weeks after 
their mentored status expired) ? It will also help you figure out how 
successful mentoring really is on your hub.

d) Do not allow OPs to directly register mentored users, and/or limit the 
number of simultaneous users they can mentor. One single mentored user is 
very demanding if they are really new to DC. If you allow your OPs to have a 
large number of simultaneous mentored users, they might end up overwhelmed 
should all of them suddenly login at the same time; and the mentoring 
relation itself might suffer from it. The suggested limit is 5 mentored 
users maximum per OP. In practice, you will find out that 3 of them is 
already very straining.
  Also, depending what you expect from mentored users, you will find out 
that some leechers for whom you did not renew mentoring might want to trick 
yours OPs into mentoring them under a different name. As a hub owner, you 
have more tools in your hands than your OPs to cross-reference and detect 
such abusers. Preventing your OPs from directly granting mentored status to 
unchecked users will allow you to quickly review each request and filter out 
obvious abuses. Again, it depends what you expect from the mentoring system 
and from mentored users in your own hub, so this last suggestion might not 
necessarily apply to you.

*Doc by DDCH Team